Doesn't it seem like the world is full
of BS? There are endless misleading
articles, butchered reports of
scientific findings, and just a
cavalcade of nonsense spewing forth from
every corner of the internet. And there
is a particular kind of BS that's always
sort of got under my skin. It's the kind
that gives the initial impression of
being intensely profound, but upon
closer inspection is either clearly
false or just outright nonsensical. This
is the study of pseudo profofound
It is a very young field in
both philosophy and psychology and I
wanted to give my take on it today. My
name is Joe Folly and this is
unsolicited advice. One, and
profoundity. A users's guide. The most
famous analysis of BS more generally,
pseudo profofound or otherwise, comes
from the philosopher Harry Frankfurt. To
simplify things somewhat, Frankfurt
defines BS as claims made regardless of
whether they are true or false that are
intended to misleadingly alter someone's
view, change their mind, or change their
feelings. That is, they might be true or
they might be untrue, but the speaker
just doesn't care. This is slightly
different from lying. as a liar still
ultimately cares about the truth. They
just consciously thwart it. Whereas a
BSER simply does not mind either way.
Certain adverts are absolute breeding
grounds for BS because they often make
technically true but severely misleading
claims. A good example of this is the
almost parodic statement, n out of 10
dentists recommend our product, which
gives the impression that n out of 10
dentists recommend that brand in
particular over and above others.
Whereas more often when you dig into the
polls that they've conducted, the
dentists normally just recommend that
type of product like an electric
toothbrush or the concept of mouthwash.
The statement is made without much care
for whether it is true, false,
misleading or otherwise. And as a
result, Frankfurt would call it BS. The
other condition that Frankfurt places on
BS is that the BSER must be attempting
to conceal the fact that they don't care
for the truth from the person that they
are talking to. When a comedian on stage
tells an absurd joke, they probably
don't care for what's true. But at the
same time, they know that and the
audience knows that and they know that
the audience knows that. This is very
different from deception. And I've
previously called this type of
self-conscious BS where everyone is in
on the joke, honest BS. But for
Frankfurt, it's just not BS. There has
to be a deceptive or semi-deceptive
intent. This is a very interesting
definition because Frankfurt's BS is
defined relative to a speaker's
intentions. That is BS is BS not
necessarily because of what is said, but
because of who said it and why. As we'll
see, I think this is a pretty good
instinct. But I also worry that thinking
about BS as only intentionbased can have
its own limitations. For one thing, it
seems like certain statements or certain
forms of statement are inherently less
truth oriented and more prone to BS than
others. To give some extreme examples,
something like 2 + 2 equals 4 or there
are infinitely many primes carry with
them criteria by which we can check
whether they are true. They are
mathematical statements and so proof is
law. Even false statements like all cats
have 10 toes is easily checkable and
thus not prone to being used in a
BS-like context. By contrast, a
statement like, I don't know, tomorrow
there dawns a new day, a day for all of
us. It's sort of tricky to see what
might make that statement true. At one
level, there clearly will be a day
tomorrow and we will experience it. In
that case, it is for us in a very loose
sense. But the statement hints at a
deeper meaning that's quite unclear,
which can facilitate the communication
of BS in certain contexts. As you can
probably tell, this is foreshadowing,
and we'll be coming back to this broad
point later in the video. However, in
broad terms, I do really like
Frankfurt's definition, and it will be
the backbone to my analysis. But before
moving on, if you're frustrated by the
amount of BS that you find in your news
feed, then you should check out today's
very kind sponsor, Ground News. Ground
News is a website and app that gathers
related articles from thousands of
sources around the world in one place so
you can compare how different outlets
cover the same story. Each story comes
with a clear breakdown of the political
bias, factuality, ownership, and
headlines of the reporting sources with
ratings backed by independent news
monitoring organizations. Grounds News
are very kindly offering anyone who uses
my link or scans my QR code 40% off
their Vantage plan as a special deal.
So, I highly encourage you to snap this
up. For instance, let's see how left and
right-wing publications differed on
reports that President Trump is thinking
of pardoning Sha Diddy Combmes. Whereas
left-wing sources emphasized those who
talked about the potential alienating
effects this could have on young female
voters, right-wing sources chose to
emphasize the reasoning behind the idea
that Trump thought the conviction had
been unfair. I especially like the blind
spots feed, which highlights stories
that are disproportionately covered by
either the left or the right. This feed
helps readers step into the other side's
news reality and understand the
different narratives that can shape
their beliefs, such as left-wing news
sources missing a dressing down given by
Cy Booker to his fellow Democratic
senators, or right-wing sources missing
claims that Trump's name had been
deliberately redacted from Epstein
related files. I just don't have a lot
of time to keep up with the news and
certainly not to examine every single
article I read for bias. So, receiving
my ground news roundup at the end of
every single day means that I can get a
variety of different news opinions,
learn which sources to trust, and make
the world less of a bewildering mess,
which all help to avoid the natural
cognitive biases that would lead me
astray. Grounds News is giving my
viewers 40% off their unlimited access
Vantage plan. They have genuinely become
my go-to new source and I sincerely hope
that you'll check them out. But anyway,
back to the video. But not all BS is
pseudo profound. There is nothing
profound about the claim that n out of
10 dentists recommend our product. So
what's the difference? Well, an obvious
sketch answer is that pseudo profofound
BS is BS masquerading as something
profound. If pseudocience is
non-sciencewearing
science's skin, and a pseudointellectual
is someone who is not an intellectual
but pretends to be one, then pseudo
profoundity must be statements
pretending to be profound. But then this
raises the obvious question, what the
hell do we mean by profound? The concept
of profoundity is incredibly hard to
break down because it's used in a
variety of ways. Funnily enough, I
recently came across a brilliant paper
by Kova Etal which empirically
investigated our intuitive use of the
word profound. And I think this is a
pretty good place to start. This is
actually the first study of its kind and
it was very open-ended. They largely
asked people what they meant by words
like profound and deep. The researchers
identified six key components of our
descriptions of when something is
profound. One, meaning. It must have
content to convey or a message. Two,
cognitive stimulation. It must lead to
reflection and thinking. Three,
multi-layered content. It requires or
encourages prolonged engagement. Four,
an important subject. It is about a
topic that matters to most people. A
prototypical examples might be how to
live or the concept of purpose. Five,
epistemic progress. It improves our
understanding of something. And six,
emotional impact. It is an emotionally
compelling or impactful thing to learn.
The authors specifically cite a
motivation to change something about
your life. So, a good example of a
statement that I consider to be profound
and that I think meets these criteria
is, "It's easy to love mankind in the
abstract, but difficult to love humans
in particular." I'm paraphrasing a point
that's made both by dsttovski in the
brothers Karamazovv and CS Lewis in the
screw tape letters among others. I think
it portrays a clear message that is
broadly true in that most people find it
easier to proclaim general statements
like love all people than to actually
actively love all people. It encourages
cognitive engagement and epistemic
progress because most of us are not
honest enough with ourselves to hold
this general shortcoming in our
conscious awareness. It's about love and
human connection which are important
subjects. It requires a prolonged
engagement with the idea to tease out
its complexities and it has an emotional
resonance through motivating us to love
one another in a more active and
demanding way. There is of course room
for disagreement here. You might, for
example, think that this was already
obviously true, but by and large, I
would posit that most people would see
this as a profound statement and that it
meets the above criteria. So, putting
these two key concepts together, we can
say that a statement is pseudo
profofound if it has little to
no concern with the truth and is in some
sense masquerading as profound. This
means that it will be imitating the
properties above but without
substantiating them. This gives us two
axes along which we can evaluate given
statements for pseudo profofound BS. One
is how the statements are used and the
other is their content. And I actually
want to start with the content because
evaluating pseudo profofound BS is a
surprisingly fruitful endeavor and
looking at its content has implications
for discourse and philosophy much more
generally. It's actually incredibly
exciting the more I dig into this two
content analysis and vibes. Let's take a
paradigm example of a pseudo profound
statement. I've actually taken this from
an empirical study on people's
receptivity to pseudo profofound BS that
we'll be talking about later in the
video. Hidden meaning transforms
unparalleled abstract beauty. As the
authors of the paper say, this is
essentially just a collection of
buzzwords strung together into a
syntactically sensible structure without
actually saying anything. What would it
mean for hidden meaning to transform
unparalleled abstract beauty? I have no
idea. Here is another example. This time
something I found on Instagram. You can
always tell when someone is going to be
successful because they're blatantly
different from everyone else around them
without even trying. The demeanor and
energy just be different. That's why
having a strong sense of identity is
important because every day the world
will try to convince you into being
someone you're not. Authenticity leads
to divine order and success. I think the
whole thing is pretty questionable, but
that last statement, authenticity leads
to divine order and success, seems like
almost a stereotypical example of pseudo
profound BS. I think I'm just going to
say PPBS from now on. Another classic
example of PPBS is the following
statement from Deepak Chopra. There is a
hidden meaning behind all events, and
this hidden meaning is serving your own
evolution. Admittedly, I couldn't find
the origin of this quote, so perhaps
it's been misattributed, but it's still
a good example of PPBS. What is it that
links statements like these together?
Well, one thing that immediately leaps
out at us is Vegas. In each case, it is
unclear exactly what would make the
statement true or how we would go about
making rational progress in a discussion
around the concept. A related thing
might be obscurantism, which I quite
often see in examples of ppbs. But I
would call obscurantism something that
leads to vagueness here. So I still
think that vagueness is a good overall
concept to categorize this under. Take
the deepack chopper one. It is
constructed by its very nature to not
just be unverifiable and unfalsifiable,
but to almost evade definite
interpretation. Terms like hidden
meaning are left unspecified as is the
idea of serving your own evolution. So
the possible interpretations that you
could give to this statement are
absolutely enormous. You could say it
means something like everything happens
for the best. But in this case, what
would you say to someone who has lost a
child? Well, because it's a hidden
meaning, you can then change tactic. You
can now say that this statement means
that any event will be for the ultimate
good of the sufferer's spirit, but they
just don't know it yet. You can say it
fits with the flow of the universe if
you like. There are a million ways to
handwave away any objection without
appearing to have abandoned the quote.
In actual fact, you're just equivocating
on the unspecified definitions. This is
not because the idea is clear and
defensible. It's because it is so
unclear that it fails to pick out a
distinct proposition or distinct set of
propositions. To relate this back to our
definition of profoundity from the
previous section, this has the
appearance of a message or a meaning,
but upon closer inspection, it doesn't
really have one at all. The same goes
for the phrase authenticity leads to
divine order and success. There is no
framework of divine order that's being
appealed to that would fill in the gaps
of this statement. And this point about
claiming or appearing to have a message
is really important because I don't have
any issue with statements that have no
definite message but also do not pretend
to. One example of this might be Zen
Coats. I won't go into too much detail
here, but these are purposefully vague
statements from Zen Buddhism that are
explicitly not meant to have a message,
but are meant to be exercises for the
reader or meditator to explore. And I
don't mind this at all because it's not
actually pretending to be profound by
our definition, even if the cones are
sometimes taken out of context and used
in this way. In terms of our second
point, cognitive stimulation, I actually
don't think that PPBS does too badly on
the whole. Though, this is partly
because almost anything can provoke
cognitive engagement. It is provoking
cognitive engagement in me now because
I'm writing a whole video critiquing it.
Likewise, pseudo profofound BS is
normally about an important subject, but
that's a pretty low bar to get over.
They also tend to be emotionally
engaging, though, as we'll see. I think
that's just as often a danger as it is a
strength. When it comes to epistemic
progress, that's where we tend to
encounter problems because the
statements are so vague that they can't
really increase our understanding of
their subject matter or of the world
more generally. To get a better
understanding of something, we plausibly
need to either learn something true
about it or gain a new way of looking at
things we already know to be true that
can allow us to investigate it further
or see it in a new light. A good example
of this from the history of science is
the unification of electricity and
magnetism. This both allowed us to learn
something new about those physical
forces that they were two sides of the
same coin and it also showed that the
mathematical framework of a field would
be incredibly important for
investigating the details of this
unified force. From poetry, we might
think of Paradise Lost and its detailed
analysis and explation of resentment and
envy, which explains a lot of seemingly
inexplicable malicious conduct. From
philosophy, we might turn to
Vitkinstein's observations about
language games and that a fruitful way
of looking at language is to examine its
function rather than simply its content.
One final one from neuroscience is the
concept of episodic-like memory coined
by Nicola Clayton to create
groundbreaking experimental designs for
the study of BERT. Each of these either
taught us something new or provided a
new way of looking at facts that we
already knew about from our analysis. So
far, you might think that PPBS actually
fulfills quite a lot of the criteria for
genuine profoundity. After all, it can
provoke engagement. It is emotionally
compelling, and it's about an important
subject. That is a pretty big chunk of
our initial criteria. I suspect this is
partly why quite a lot of people are
actually fairly likely to rate randomly
generated statements of pseudo profound
BS as genuinely profound when pulled.
However, there is a key difference
between the aspects of profoundity that
PPBS performs well in and the aspects
where it fails. It tends to succeed in
the aesthetic criteria of profoundity,
but tends to fail in the contentbased
criteria to provoke a reader's thinking
or to emotionally affect them and to
mention important subjects. These can
all be achieved with relatively
superficial qualities. You can encourage
someone to think, associate the
statement with an important topic, and
be evocative just by using certain words
or putting things in a certain way. This
can actually be quite a fun exercise.
Here's one I just came up with. Love is
the fullness of patience. That could
probably make you think it's about an
important topic and is mysterious enough
to be emotionally compelling, but it is
also so vague it can mean so many
different things. Is it that love
requires extreme patience? Is it that
patience is just a minor form of the
thing we call love? Is it that you need
to wait patiently for a long time before
love comes knocking on your door? It
fails to let itself be pinned down. And
again, I don't mind this if the only
point of it is just to get you thinking
without really trying to say anything
definite. But if this is presented as a
great contentful realization, then I do
think it would qualify as pseudo
profofound BS. I've also noticed a lot
of specific PPBS tropes that I would
like to go through here. I wouldn't say
that these define the concept, but I do
think they'll be helpful for us to spot
it. And ultimately, that is the kind of
useful end we're working towards here.
Pseudo profoundity often universalizes
something that probably is just
straightforwardly true, but only within
certain contexts. Take there is a hidden
meaning behind all events and this
hidden meaning is to serve your
evolution. Well, sometimes bad things
happen but ultimately do work out for
the best. Couples break up and then they
meet people better suited to them. I
hated my job before YouTube and that
motivated me to start this channel.
Likewise, sometimes authenticity does
lead to success. I'm not saying that
that never happens. However, none of
this means that these are general
universal cosmic rules. They're just
observations that apply in certain
circumstances. This also applies to
pseudo profofound declarations or
recommendations. Take the following now
infamous phrase. If you can't handle me
at my worst, you don't deserve me at my
best. Sometimes this is probably a good
idea. If it was said by someone who was
fed up by how their partner would never
be patient with them about their minor
eminently reasonable foibless, then yes,
this would have some value and wisdom in
it. If it were instead uttered by
someone who is an absolute psycho, but
is sometimes tolerable if you catch them
in a relatively good mood, then the
statement is not only ill- advised, it
is outright self-destructive for them to
take on board. But putting this forward
out of context as a universal
declaration lends it the appearance of a
profound general observation about life
and relationships. Plus, since being
undervalued is a flattering image, it's
likely to be emotionally appealing to
many of us. Thus, a statement that would
be pretty mundane if it were given its
proper context. That would probably read
something like, "Some people are too
impatient with their partner's low
points in relationships becomes a
universal statement that is nonetheless
incredibly unhelpful, but simply sounds
a lot more profound. This brings out
another trope of pseudo profound BS,
which is that it often has
interpretations which are either trivial
or false and/or highly questionable.
Daniel Dennett used the term deep for
statements like this and I think it is a
fantastic term. A prime example of deep
brand pseudo profoundity is the phrase
there is no happiness without suffering.
If we say this just to mean that in this
world happiness and suffering coexist or
that suffering sometimes leads to
happiness or that they're sometimes
intertwined or that we identify
happiness via the contrast medium of
suffering or unhappiness, then that's
true. But it does just express a pretty
trivial fact. If instead it argues that
there is a deep metaphysical connection
between every happiness and every
suffering, then it is doubtful and
certainly requires much more
substantiation. So, how can we detect
pseudo profofound BS? Well, I don't
think there is a perfect method, but
here are some key questions that I think
might be relatively helpful. One, how
definite or specific are the claims this
statement is making? Two, how would we
check whether its contents are plausible
or true? How would we know if they were
implausible or false? Three, does the
statement justify its scope? That is, if
it makes a universal declaration, to
what extent has it justified that
universality? Four, if the statement
were rephrased in more mundane language,
what would you think of it? Each of
these attempts to pin down whether the
statement actually has definite content
or if it is mainly or purely vibes. I'm
not some cold-hearted bastard. I do
really value when a statement does have
definite content and is also put in an
artful or emotionally compelling way.
But when the vibes become loadbearing, I
think that is a pretty big warning sign.
Importantly, whether something is pseudo
profofound BS is a matter of degree.
Take our examples from the start. Hidden
meaning transforms unparalleled abstract
beauty is far less clear and leans more
heavily on mere aesthetics than
something like everything happens for
your evolution. I would still say that
they are both pretty pseudo profofound,
but one is far more so than the other.
However, this is only part of the story.
It only makes sense to say something is
pseudo profofound if someone is saying
it with the intention for it to be
perceived as profound. As with the
example of a Zen Cohen, it is perfectly
possible for a statement to be
deliberately vague or difficult to pin
down without trying to appear like it
does have real content. Our analysis is
incomplete without looking at the
function of pseudo profundity. And
luckily, that is just our next point. If
you want to help me make more videos
like this, then please consider
subscribing either to the channel or if
you're feeling very generous and want to
get access to exclusive content to the
Patreon. The links are in the
description. Three, the function and
effects of pseudo profofound BS. So,
what is pseudo profofound BS for? At
first, this can sound like a slightly
mysterious question. People surely use
PPBS in a variety of different ways. But
by its construction, pseudo profofound
BS is very well suited for certain
social tasks in much the same way that
sarcasm can be used in a variety of
ways, but is particularly well suited to
humor. And I think that it's worth
exploring some of these special suited
tasks of pseudo profound BS here. It's
also worth noting that there's not an
awful lot of academic literature
specifically on the function of PPBS. So
I am largely going off my own
observations. Consider these hypotheses
rather than conclusions. Let's return to
a key component of Frankfurt's
definition of BS that it must
misleadingly aim to change someone's
mind in some way, shape or form. This
change could occur at the level of
behavior or attitude or even just
emotion. So what change is the peddler
of pseudo profofound BS trying to
instill in their audience? Maybe our
best bet is to ask the following
question. When we perceive someone as
having said something profound, what do
we think and how do we react? Here is a
rough catalog of my personal reactions
and you can compare them with your own.
One, I think the speaker is clever or
wise. Two, I think they know things or
understand things in a way that I
currently do not. Three, I am likely to
seek their counsel in future. And four,
I will trust that other things they say
are probably worth listening to. These
seem to cluster around two main points.
The first is that I see the speaker as
wise in some way. And the second is that
I am likely to trust the value of their
word in the future. So coming across as
profound builds both reputation and
credibility. There's already quite a lot
of value in this in a world where there
is so much information out there and so
many people to listen to. Take a writer
that I often see as making genuinely
profound statements. Hannah Arent. The
fact that I find many of her
observations profound means that even
when I come across statements or
arguments that I am initially skeptical
about, I am likely to give them the
benefit of the doubt, interpret them
highly charitably, or just think that
I've not properly understood her point
rather than dismissing them out of hand.
To see someone as a profound thinker is
to treat them as an epistemic authority,
and being seen as an authority is
incredibly socially advantageous. The
most obvious benefit that someone with
this authority could gain is simple
monetary advantage. Take the number of
people who hang phrases that they see as
profound in their house or people who
buy books from those that they consider
to be profound. I won't name any names,
but when I was specifically searching
for pseudo profofound BS on social
media, a lot of it was from people
selling some kind of course, normally
promising to solve all your relationship
issues or fix your troubled mind through
seven easy steps for $599.
Now, I didn't buy any of these courses,
so I can't attest to their quality. For
all I know, they are all brilliant and
genius. But it was clear that the pseudo
profofound statements put out on social
media were part of the marketing for
these courses and a pretty major part as
it seemed to me. But to be clear, pseudo
profofound BS is not just found in
spiritual or self-help settings. There
is a whole genre of corporate PPBS that
often seems to aim to increase the
perceived authority or beneficence of a
company. Take this example from a
business that shall remain nameless. To
be at this institution is to care. This
communicates basically nothing concrete,
but it is aimed to raise the moral
authority of the institution by invoking
a common piece of ethical language. But
why is it that PPBS is so good at this?
And why does so many people use it?
Personally, I think it comes back to the
vagueness we talked about in the last
section coupled with this use of
aesthetics to signal that the statement
is clearly meant to be profound even if
you don't get it at first. One of my
favorite insights to come out of
cognitive linguistics is Dan Spurber and
Deree Wilson's relevance theory which
proposes that when we interpret a
statement we are trying to maximize
cognitive effect while minimizing
cognitive effort. So I'll give you an
example. Imagine that we were at a party
and someone walks in dressed as a clown.
I turn to you and say he's in the wrong
house. Even though I've not clarified
who exactly I mean by he, you will
immediately know that I'm talking about
the guy dressed as a clown because
intuitively speaking, that is the way my
statement makes the most sense. It is
the interpretation that makes what I've
said most relevant to the situation at
hand. But why am I talking about this?
Well, apart from the fact that I just
love to bring up relevance theory at
every possible opportunity, I also think
that this is a great way to analyze why
pseudo profofound BS can be so
compelling to so many people and thus
why it is so good at building someone's
perceived authority. Essentially, if
you're trying to maximize the cognitive
effect of a vague statement, one of the
easiest ways to do this is to relate it
to your own life in some relevant way.
If we assume that the statement is not
in fact meaningless or nonsense, then it
just makes sense to read a meaning into
it that makes sense and possibly even
applies to us. For example, again, take
the statement, authenticity leads to
divine order and success. At present, it
is so underspecified that of course it
doesn't really have a well- definfined
meaning. But Sei was trying to construct
a meaning out of it. Sei was approaching
it in a hypercharitable fashion. I might
remember all of the times that I behaved
inauthentically for no benefit and felt
like I betrayed myself in the process.
That feeling of betrayal could be used
to make sense of how the statement
relates authenticity to divine order.
inauthenticity could be seen as
disordered. Likewise, there have been
times where behaving just as I pleased
led to success. I can kind of
reconstruct a sensible meaning out of
all of the vagueness and create a
somewhat sensible realization out of
that chaos. This also helps explain a
strange phenomena that quite often
occurs with pseudo profofound BS.
Despite the fact that they are basically
contentless, they can still sometimes
provoke a substantive and contentful
realization in someone hearing them.
Take the following example of randomly
generated pseudo profoundity. This life
is nothing short of a redefining font of
sentient curiosity. This is of course
basically nonsense in as much as I don't
quite know what a redefining font of
sentient curiosity means. But if I were
to read this in a charitable mood,
assuming that the speaker was a profound
thinker, then I would probably interpret
it as saying something like, "There is
always something to be curious about."
If I had never had that thought before,
then it might strike me as pretty
profound and pretty meaningful. As
others have pointed out, the vagueness
of pseudo profofound BS works a little
bit like cold reading from a psychic. It
relies on the reader to pick out the
interpretation that sounds most profound
to them and then uses aesthetics to
prime them to expect profoundity to just
encourage that process along. Let's take
that corporate example. To be at this
institution is to care. This allows us
to fill in the gaps for what care could
possibly mean in this context. So the
reader is free to select whichever is
the most emotionally compelling
interpretation. I think this is a very
important component of the overall
function of PPBS. The mechanism of
persuasion is not found primarily in the
content of the claim because there just
isn't much content there. It's rather in
the reconstruction of the claim made in
the reader's head. And this makes it
well suited to a grandise the speaker.
Again, the distinction comes in the way
the pseudo profoundity is presented. The
peddler of pseudo profofound BS is
disguising the fact that the
realization, if any, is made is due
largely to the reader's interpretation
or the hearer's interpretation rather
than to the statement itself. The
speaker thus takes credit for what the
reader or audience is in fact doing.
This is really quite a clever trick
because it allows the BS to be
applicable to as wide a variety of
people as possible and relies on the
audience to fill in the variables of the
function if that makes sense. And now we
have an idea of why this works. So to
bring the last two sections together, we
can now see pseudo profofound BS both
from a functional angle and also from a
content angle. Broadly speaking, we've
identified the following properties.
One, pseudo profofound BS is BS
presented as if it were profound despite
its lack of concern for truth or
conceptual content. Two, it is normally
aimed at increasing the perceived
authority of the speaker as well as
instilling a felt sense of profoundity.
Three, it often achieves this by being
vague enough that the audience can
interpret the statement in any way they
like and pick the one that uniquely
applies to them. Four, the speaker then
implicitly or explicitly takes credit
for the conclusion arrived at by the
audience. Again, in both mechanism and
aim, this is more specific than our
initial Frankfurtian definition for
standard BS. And I do think that this is
a relatively decent starting point for
spotting both what might count as PPBS
and in what circumstances it is likely
to arise. So that is a broad sketch
account of pseudo profound BS. I would
emphasize once again that this is a
pretty underexplored field and I would
encourage people to add to edit and
critique this as needed. But what do we
do with all of this information? Well,
that is just our next point. Four,
navigating pseudo profoundity. Very few
researchers in the past few years have
done as much to study what makes us
receptive to BS as Dr. Shane literal. He
also divides BS into different types in
his research with pseudo profofound BS
as one of these types, which makes him
incredibly helpful for our purposes
here. A very intuitive suggestion that
many people have when they're asked,
"How do you not fall for pseudo
profofound BS?" is something like,
"Well, we need to teach people to think
and reflect more on statements to check
whether they are pseudo profofound and
whether they are BS." But literal has
formulated a question that's almost
tailorade for detecting pseudo profound
BS. And he tested its efficacy on a
sample of 136 people. It's less of a
question and more of a task. But anyway,
it reads as follows. As best you can,
please describe in detail why the quote
below is profound or is not profound.
That is, give your best explanation as
to what precisely it is about the quote
that causes you to feel it is a profound
statement or is not a profound
statement. Now this was not some kind of
silver bullet and the effect of asking
this question was only small but it did
cause some people to revise their
judgment that a pseudo profofound
statement was indeed profound. They
revised it as not profound. I'm less
interested in the specific wording of
this task. The important thing for me is
what the task made the participant do.
Pin down the actual content of the
statement. In pseudo profofound
statements, this is going to inherently
be pretty difficult due to the
interpretive vagueness we discussed
earlier. And so intuitively, it makes
sense that asking people to specify what
exactly about the statement is profound
would make the statement lose its shine
for at least some people. It breaks the
emotional spell cast by the aesthetics.
And on that point, another important
part of not being susceptible to PPBS is
to recognize the kinds of aesthetic
markers that make something seem more
plausible to you. The most obvious of
these is just the presence of an
authority figure. It has been
independently confirmed by literal as
well as by other researchers like
Gleoric and Villotvik and I'm so sorry
about pronouncing those names absolutely
terribly that more people are fooled by
pseudo profofound BS if it comes from an
authority figure either spiritual or
scientific. This is part of why it's
often profitable to slap a picture of
Einstein or nature next to a fake quote
to get people to take it more seriously.
So perhaps a good question to ask at
first glance is something like, "How
would I react to this statement if it
was said by a stranger on the street?"
However, I think that the situation is
significantly more complex than this
because it is arguably rational to have
more patience with a statement that
comes from a genuine intellectual
authority than one that comes from a
random person. For example, here is a
statement by the logician and
philosopher Gotlob Frager taken out of
context. I call a thought something for
which the question of truth arises. If
this was taken out of context by a
random person and relayed back to me, it
would probably come across as pseudo
profofound BS because as it stands, it's
totally unclear what it means. However,
in the context of Frager's essay, which
is called the thought a logical inquiry,
it is clear that Frager is slowly
unpacking a technical definition of the
term thought for the purposes of formal
and philosophical logic. So clearly the
test can't be quite as simple as
divorcing all authority from any
statement. So maybe a refined question
is this. Does the speaker's authority
justify the extra patience, extra
charitability, or just extra credence
given to this state? This won't protect
us from all forms of pseudo profofound
BS as someone is perfectly capable of
pedalling pseudo profofound BS within
their own field if they so wish, but it
can serve as a relatively decent rule of
thumb. Also, I know this is a pretty
basic point, but it is worth checking
whether the person actually said the
phrase in question. to quote Plato,
"You've got to stop attributing random
bollocks to my name." We can also
include some more speculative tips that
I just suspect will be helpful, though,
of course, I'm open to being proven
wrong about this. As we said earlier, we
can rephrase any seemingly profound
statement in less evocative language to
see if it continues to hold up to
scrutiny. This will force us to specify
its exact meaning since we'll be putting
it in our own words, which links to
Literal's point from earlier. At this
point, we can compare our mundane
version of this alleged profoundity to
see how far it has drifted from the
original state. If there is a big
difference, then we can safely conclude
that we were reading profound meaning
into the statement rather than the
statement itself being profound. Even if
what we eventually write down is
something that most people would
consider profound. There's nothing wrong
with reading into things, but we
shouldn't credit the speaker of the
statement for this realization, nor
raise them up as a trusted authority in
our eyes. We can also ask whether the
person has something to gain by us
viewing them as profound. This is not a
knockdown objection. There are some
people who have something to gain from
us seeing them as profound, but also do
have profound knowledge in a given area
that they would like to share with us.
Someone like the neuroscientist Lisa
Feldman Barrett will sell more books if
she is viewed as having a profound
insight into the structure of our
emotions. But she has also worked on
this topic for decades and actually does
have a lot to contribute. So I'd say
this is more of a mild alarm bell than a
red flag. It just suggests that we
should approach that person's statements
with a touch of extra skepticism. we
should be aware that they do have
something to gain by pedalling pseudo
profofound BS even if this person in
particular does not. And lastly, we can
be aware that as soon as we find
something emotionally compelling or
aesthetically pleasing, we are more
likely to view it as profound regardless
of whether it is really contentful.
There is no way to fully extrapate this
bias that we have towards emotionally
compelling information. But again, it
can serve as another mild warning bell
that we are likely to have turned off or
dialed down our critical thinking to a
greater or lesser extent. And so it can
remind us to pay special attention to
whatever emotionally or aesthetically
compelling thing we are reading. In
other words, don't just be fooled by a
pretty face. Even when it comes to
writing, there's probably no way to
ensure that we are totally insulated
from pseudo profofound BS because we
often want to do two things at the same
time. First, we want to treat the ideas
we encounter charitably as to not
strawman them and miss out on some
potential insight. However, we also
don't want to give too much respect to
ideas that don't deserve it and read in
meaningful content to meaningless
states. The problem is that these two
aims tug us in different directions. To
paraphrase the Australian comedian Tim
Menchin, we want to be open-minded, but
not so much that our brain falls out.
This is in a certain sense an
optimization problem and one that we
will have to continually refine over the
course of our lives. We don't want to be
so strict on things that seem like
pseudo profound BS that we miss out on
actual profoundity that's simply beyond
our understanding at that time. But we
also don't want to just let the
floodgates open and have nonsense
swarming in. For my part, I hope this
video has contributed in some small way
to your ongoing understanding around
what pseudo profofound BS is, how to
spot it, and how we might respond to it.
And remember, love is the fullness of
patience. And if you want to check out
some of my other critical thinking
videos, here's one examining logical
fallacies. Not just listing them, but
taking them apart principle by
principle. Thank you so much for
watching and have a wonderful day.